In 1953, a popular myth claimed that
Yale graduates who wrote down their
goals were significantly more successful
20 years later than those who didn't.
The study was cited in self-help books,
business seminars, and motivational
speeches for decades. You can still find
it floating around LinkedIn. The only
problem, the study never happened. It
was completely fabricated. A ghost that
wandered the halls of corporate training
programs like a benevolent poltergeist.
But it persisted like a bad penny. It
kept showing up for decades. Why?
because it said what people wanted to
believe that clarity of ambition would
bring control that intention would yield
destiny. The cult of goal setting
converts uncertainty into an illusion of
progress. It demands specificity in
exchange for comfort. And it replaces
selfrust with the performance of future
planning. That makes it wildly appealing
to organizations, executives, and
knowledge workers who want to feel like
they're doing something without doing
anything unpredictable. The more
interesting question is who is not
setting goals and why? It turns out that
many of the people doing genuinely
innovative work avoid explicit goals
entirely. They work within constraints
instead. A goal is a win condition.
Constraints are the rules of the game.
But not all games are worth playing. And
some of the most powerful forms of
progress emerged from people who stopped
trying to win and started building new
game boards entirely. When John Boyd,
the brilliant/assable military
strategist, developed the UDA loop, he
worked within the limits of jet fighter
dog fights. In those constraints, he
found a dynamic model of decision-making
that would later influence military
doctrine, business strategy, even
startup culture. Richard Fineman didn't
get his Nobel Prize by pursuing win a
Nobel Prize as a goal. He played with
problems, often placing arbitrary limits
on himself. What if we assume this
system has no dissipation? What if we
ignore spin? He looked for elegance
within boundaries, not outcomes. And his
freedom came from self-imposed
structure. Constraints do not block
creativity. They aim it. The sonet form
is maddeningly restrictive and yet
Shakespeare produced infinite meaning
inside those 14 lines. Jazz musicians
work within a key and temper. Architects
must respect the loadbearing capacity of
concrete. And the painter who begins
with a blank canvas faces more paralysis
than the one who starts with a frame and
a pallet. Setting goals feels like
action. It gives you the warm sense of
progress without the discomfort of
change. You can spend hours calibrating,
optimizing, refining your goals. You can
build a notion dashboard. You can make a
spreadsheet. You can go on a
dopaminefueled productivity binge and
still never do anything meaningful.
Because goals are often surrogates for
clarity. We set goals when we're
uncertain about what we really want. The
goal becomes a placeholder. It acts as a
proxy for direction, not a result of it.
In World War II, when Allied bombers
returned to base riddled with bullet
holes, engineers initially proposed
reinforcing the areas with the most
damage. But statistician Abraham Wald
pointed out the floor. They were only
seeing the planes that made it back. The
holes marked the survivable areas, the
real vulnerabilities with the untouched
parts on the returning planes because
the ones hit there never came home.
Goals often focus our attention on those
visible holes. But it's the invisible
constraints that tell us what really
matters. When people talk about goals,
they often bring up NASA. NASA had a
fixed budget, fixed timeline, and a goal
that boarded on the absurd. Land a man
on the moon before the decade was out.
But what made it possible wasn't the
moonshot goal itself. It was the sheer
range of constraints. weight, heat,
vacuum, radio delay, computation. Each
constraint forced creative workarounds.
Slide rules and paper simulations gave
us one of the most improbable
technological feats in history. Because
constraints make solutions not obvious,
they force the kind of second order
thinking that goals actively discourage.
Instead of aiming for a finish line, the
constrained mind seeks viability. It
doesn't ask how do I get there? It asks
what's possible from here. A goal set at
time t is a bet on the future from
position of ignorance. The more volatile
the domain, the more brittle that bet
becomes. This is where smart people get
stuck. The brighter you are, the more
coherent your plans tend to look on
paper. But plans are scripts and reality
is improvisation. Constraints scale
better because they don't assume
knowledge. They are adaptive and they
respond to feedback. A small team that
decides we will not hire until we have
product market fit has created a
constraint that guides decisions without
locking in predictions. A founder who
says, "I will only build products I can
explain to a teenager in 60 seconds," is
using a constraint as a filtering
mechanism. This is the psychology of
anti- goals. There's a kind of internal
rebellion that occurs when you set a
goal you don't believe in. You drag your
heels, you sabotage yourself, and you
procrastinate, but not because you're
lazy, because you're not aligned. Anti-
goals are constraints disguised as
aversions. The entrepreneur who says, "I
never want to work with clients who
drain me," is sketching a boundary
around their time, energy, and even
identity. And it's not a goal. It's a
refusal. Refusals shape lives just as
powerfully as ambitions. Marcus
Aurelius, writing in his private journal
that we now call meditations, returned
constantly to the idea of limits. He
didn't prescribe grand goals. He
reminded himself what not to do. Don't
lie. Don't whine. Don't be ruled by
impulse. The Stoic path itself is
constraint oriented. It avoids the
seduction of outcomes. Think about the
career of the constraint setter. One
person sets a goal, become a
best-selling author. Another imposes a
constraint. write every day but never
write what bores me. The first may spend
years pitching, networking, contorting
themselves into marketable shapes. The
second may accidentally build a
following simply because the work
sustains itself. The historian Fernand
Browell once wrote that time flows on
multiple levels. The rapid time of
events, the slow time of structures, and
the almost imperceptible time of
geography. Constraints operate on the
second level. They shape how you move
through the world over years and
decades. Not by pointing to a specific
outcome, by refusing paths that would
corrupt, dilute, or distract you. So
when should you use goals? There are
times when goals make sense. Training
for a marathon, preparing for an exam,
trying to ship a product by a hard
deadline in finite, controlled, well
understood domains. Goals are okay, but
smart people often face ambiguous and
problems. Should I switch careers, start
a company, move cities, build a media
business? In those spaces, setting a
goal is like mapping a jungle with a
Sharpie. Constraints are the machete. If
you're building a path through the
unknown, it's better to say, "I won't
take money from people I don't trust. I
won't build things that I wouldn't use.
I won't work in teams where I have to
wear a mask." These aren't goals, but
they will get you further than most
goals ever will. To close the loop, John
Boyd again. In his famous decision fork,
he posed a career-defining question. Do
you want to be someone or do you want to
do something? Goals often come from the
first desire. Constraints come from the
second. One is about image and the other
is about identity. And the latter has
more room to